You're two too. You're listening to radiolab.
I thought I'd see if I can get the sound of baby sleeping.
Yep.
This is Radiolab. Today's program is about sleep.
I don't have to tell you how good sleep is.
You do it yourself every night.
Will you try and how wonderful when it actually works.
When you can close your eyes and forget the day and just drift off into oblivion
like a little baby.
Well, let's suppose that you are a little baby,
this little baby and you grew up to become a scientist,
like one of the scientists we'll hear from in this program and you decide to ask
what should be the dumbest question ever.
Why do we sleep?
Not just us. Pretty much everything sleeps as far as we know. All mammals do it.
All birds fees, locusts, cockroaches, crayfish, reptiles in sex, scorpions,
everything that's been studied has something that looks like sleep.
[inaudible]
it's a mystery,
but most things we sort of know what they are for and also how they work.
But sleep is really in your face. I mean, everybody does it.
You do it from the cradle,
the grave. You can't help doing it because if you try to stay awake,
you know at some point it's a repressible and we don't know why.
That's a shameful state of affairs.
How can you be a scientist at the 21st century and I know the answer to that.
There you go. Okay.
That's a pretty good way to begin. Now with shame. Yeah. Yeah.
Today on Radiolab, we're going to try to correct this,
a shameful state in the fingers when it comes to the subject of sleep.
We'll talk with people who can help us understand what it's for, why we do it,
and what happens when we don't. I'm Robert Krulwich. I'm Jetta. Boom. Ron,
stay with us.
Go
[inaudible].
For centuries people thought that sleep was kind of the opposite of being awake,
which reasonable? One more thing. Sure. Because you know,
during the day you're doing all these things,
you're having all these thoughts and feelings at night. You just lie there very,
very still that like sometimes a bomb could go off and you wouldn't wake up.
I can hardly wake up even in a fire.
No, I'm a really Haley sleeper. Amy, very, very heavy sleeper.
When is it,
if all you've got are your eyes to go on sleep can seem like being well,
like being off? Yeah, like off. Yes, right or worse. Well,
both Shakespeare Servant is referred to sleep as death.
That's Dr Carlos Schenck.
He wrote a great book about sleep called Paradox last we go to,
we go to bed every night. We die every night and then we wake up in the morning,
we're alive again.
And that was the prevailing theory for centuries for Dr Shank,
the awakening to just how wrong Shakespeare and Cervantes were about sleep came
one day while he was sitting in a class for med school.
My first year of medical school,
this was back in 1972 we had an emeritus professor who actually was a Nobel
prize winner. Dr uh, Eccles, John or John Kuru Eccles from,
here's what happened. This esteemed lecturer walks into class,
pops the cassette into the tape deck, hits play and outcomes. This sound,
well, the sound was
or 32nd, let me get it right. Oh, here we go.
And multiply this by a hundred.
This is the professor announced is the sound of a cat's brain while asleep.
My God shake almost fell out of the seat.
This is the brain during sleep making these really rapid,
high pitch multiple sounds. That just blew us away.
It wasn't just clearly while that cat was curled up on this little kitty basket,
it's brain
was very, very alive, much more than anyone expected, and it's,
this is still a little weird revelation. Like, take my cat Sammy. All right.
This is the sound like cat Sam. He sleepy.
Yeah.
To think that while Sam is sitting on my lap, totally out,
there's a circus happening in his brain. What's going on in there?
If you can imagine back in the seventies this was a paradigm shift.
People were suddenly like, oh my God,
we're going to figure out anything about sleep. Right? All right,
we have to ask the brain, and this is the room where we do all of our surgeries,
and luckily
that's easily done if you're willing to get your hands dirty. Okay?
So the first step is you have to make an incision on top of the animal's head.
When you've done that, we drill holes,
do the animal skeleton
and uh, and then you insert your electrode,
your standing knees and that's simply it. A little window into their brain.
You could see right there on the, on the screen, you can see that mainly wait,
are you out of your mind and you just,
did you just put a hole into a kittens head? No, this wasn't my cat. Come on.
So what was it we were doing there? Well you just heard was a,
a mock surgery to an iguana actually. And then we won. I mean it's,
it's not a nice look. Look, look, look the animal. Yeah.
Not Harmed within 20 minutes of coming out of the anesthetic,
the animal is moving around, it's eating, it's climbing and it's, its basking.
It might seem like a rather invasive procedure, but in actuality it's, it's,
it's not too bad at all. Yeah. And that by the way is John Les skew.
He's a graduate student at the a ecology department at Indiana state,
which is where we are.
John gave our reporter Kara older testing a tour of the lab are big boys get
here and they all have nice hats chit or the Iguanas.
These kids are a little frightening to me. They're pretty huge.
They're like four feet long, head to tail. Oh, I didn't know that. I mean,
they look like baby alligators.
Pick that one up and John measures their brain waves at night to see what
happens. It's in their head as they sleep. In a way,
it's a continuation of that cat experiment that Dr Shank just told us about
except what they're looking for is much more peculiar than could ever happen in
a cat or enough. What does that, let me put it to you as a puzzle. Okay,
and forget Iguanas. Dolphins. Dolphins. Yep.
How is it that a dolphin in the ocean or even see the dolphins that you might
find at six flags in New Jersey? They have to.
Cody is our 10 year old Atlantic bottlenose dolphins.
Buddy Avalon is 12 years old and that's their trainer. Megan to terror of year.
Mitra is holding the mic. Anyhow, here's the puzzle. We asked Megan about this,
how is it it her two dolphins,
Cody and Avalon can successfully sleep.
Given the inherent challenges of being a dolphin? I don't. I don't.
What do you motor the challenges of a dolphin? Well,
they have significant challenges. My friend first, they've got to breathe.
They're not, they're conscious breathers are not unconscious breathers, so they,
they have to think about breathing. Making matters worse. Dolphins are not fish,
so they have to breathe air,
which means they have to constantly consciously come up to the surface to
breathe air every few minutes.
So you can imagine what would happen if they decided to go unconscious for
awhile. Ala Drown. Right.
And yet they do manage to sleep a lot. Oh, how long?
Eight hours a day. Like Aileen. Yeah, eight hours. But how, that's the puzzle.
What happens is they do what we call logging. Yeah.
It's when they rest on the surface of the water, you know,
in a log floats down a river. It just floats.
[inaudible] that's exactly what they look like. And they rest half their brain.
Yeah. [inaudible] their brain is half their brain is asleep.
At a time that is nature solution to cut the dolphin brain in half.
I mean literally, literally in half,
so that one half can snooze while the other half keeps the dolphin swimming and
surfacing just enough to breathe from the outside.
You can't really tell what's happening.
It just looks like the Dolphin is sort of a wig, but a little out of it.
It's almost like the state of when you're falling asleep,
but if something happened, you'd wake right up.
So they're in that state all the time. It can be characterized as groggy.
That's Steve Lima. He runs the one of the labs back in Indiana.
There's sort of a wig and you're sort of asleep,
but it's just a way of of staying awake enough and again, it's easy to miss,
but if you look inside that groggy dolphins brain,
what the brainwaves are doing [inaudible] exquisitely obvious.
It's clear as that six year old can figure it out when half of the brain has
these beautiful slow ways I can sign for no.
And the other one's just jacking all over the place.
[inaudible]
beautiful. Wow. That is amazing. Yeah,
it's called the uni hemispheric sleep.
That's what the guys at Indiana state are really interested in because,
and here's the next surprise. It seems to go way beyond dolphins.
They're aquatic mammals like whales, seals and sea lions.
John says at all the marine mammals that have been studied seem to do it too
recently. Walruses they're all found to engage in uni hemispheric sleep as well.
And now the Indiana team led by an okay by this guy,
I'm Charles m lanner, chair of the Department of Ecology and organismal biology.
They have found this weird split brain behavior and creatures of the air.
Let me, let me just back up a little bit and describe, uh, the, this experiment.
Charlie and a student had been at the park one day and they noticed something.
We observed that duck stocks,
sometimes we'll get together into groups like on a log for ducks.
We'll get together and snooze in a neat little line.
And the birds that were sitting in the middle of that line tended to be sleeping
with both eyes closed.
The birds that were sitting on the outside of that row tended to look a little
bit more wary. The inevitable question,
what's going on here led to a very simple experiment.
We put four birds in a row for Mallard ducks this time in the lab and they
watched them sleep.
The two birds in the center of this row slept with both eyes,
closed the birds on the outlet, outer edges both left and right,
slept with one eye closed and one I opened one more time,
slept with one eye closed and one eye opened. It's just like in that song
[inaudible] you know
that Metallica Song I, I missed it.
I missed a good one and I knew they were all bought in. This is true, you know,
no one knows this,
but that song is really about adaptive sleeping behavior and dogs.
The outer eye, the eye that was faced away from the group,
the eye that was facing towards where potential predators might come from that
stayed open. At this point,
Charlie had a pretty good idea of what was going on because he knew that inside
bird brains, each eye is attached to the opposite hemisphere.
The left eye is attached to the right hemisphere.
The right eye is attached to the left hemisphere,
so his team and planted some electrodes to measure what the duck brains were
doing and blah, blah. Like the dolphins,
the ducks two were sleeping one half of their brain at a time.
The bird could simultaneously sleep and be awake.
Not only that, here's the cool part. After a few hours,
what happened was is that the birds that were on the outer edge then would
rotate, stand up,
turn around 180 degrees and then sit back and the other I
would then get some sleep and consequently the opposite hemisphere would get
some sleep. When we saw that and we said, oh yeah, it's just that good,
good because right there in the docs was a perfect illustration of what these
guys think. It's all about you've got to sleep for whatever reason, right,
but sleep is danger, danger, danger, danger.
That's the headline for dolphins. The main dangerous drown danger. Danger,
you know? Yeah. For ducks getting eaten, pager ducks have to sleep major,
but how can they nature when lurking in the darkness or foxes and wolves and a
hundred other eaters of ducks. Do you like snakes?
I don't know. Not really. I don't dislike snakes.
He's good man. Good man. In another nifty experiment,
John took the resident's snake Monte. Yes is, yeah,
ga. Hey big snake. He is.
What about a four foot long python and at night you're so cute.
John Brought Monte the python into the room where his iguanas sleep and he
terrifies that really well.
I mean Monte was in a cage so he couldn't really hurt the Iguanas.
But as soon as that snake appeared, all the lizards popped one eye open.
I vapid and, and the train that open eye right on Monte,
the snake,
but a big snake in the room and they'll watch it with one eye all night.
That Steve Lima again, they don't like these next, that's for sure.
I never removed the snake from the room the next day and they're still looking
for the next night or two. So they keep one eye, you know,
trained on that door for a few more. About two or three days,
they go back to a regular sleep.
[inaudible] [inaudible]
so what does this all mean? Well, think about this. Okay. All the sea mammals,
they do it right. We'll list the ones I've been studying.
All the flying creatures, they do it. The reptiles seem to do it too.
Who does that leave? You mean? Who's left?
Not Sleeping with a half a brain on and the other half a brain off. Yeah.
Cool.
Um, us, we may be the strange ones. Well,
it is sort of strange in that terrestrial mammals can't do it for Estriol.
Mammals just for some reason have lost the ability to do this at all.
Mammals says John de terrestrial mammals, the ones that live on land.
And here's this theory. Sometime long ago,
our scaly ancestor wandered up on the land and thought, I think I'll dig a hole.
Yeah, I'm going to take a hole.
The hole is dark and it was safe. And for the first time,
millions of years of evolution,
that little creature closed both eyes.
Ah,
[inaudible]
and so we lost it. Totally speculative theory of course,
but the basic idea is if you are protected and safe,
you can afford to close both eyes, conk out completely.
And that simple idea of safety that explains while these guys think almost
everything where you sleep, how you sleep, how long you sleep,
it all boils down to two words. Predation, risk, predation,
risk per dation risk, which is really just a fancy way of saying,
generally speaking, just your risk of being killed, the risk of being eaten. Now
what does this have to do with us?
Here we are, top of the food chain in our warm beds, nice warm bed, locked door,
a locked door covers maybe a nice neighborhood,
a good police force looking after you at nighttime
and you live in a country that has a very secure living in
environment.
You would think that this whole predation risk idea has nothing to do with us.
Wow. Well,
there's a few studies that have looked at a c sleep patterns where people are
sleeping in novel environments. What's a novel environment?
Did you mean like a hotel? Oh, that first night at a hotel.
Why is it no one could sleep? Well, that first night at a hotel,
on your first night of sleeping in a hotel room,
you generally have less rem sleep and less and deep slow wave sleep relative to
sleeping in your house. I suffer from that myself.
I don't sleep well in hotel rooms,
especially if you're just one night per place or something.
I might sleep this terrible.
There are some folks that actually hypothesized or at certain Predator relays in
the brain, danger, danger, danger,
and that these circuits remain active at all times.
No, what does that's true that, yeah,
we all have buried deep in our reptile brain,
a sort of Predator alert system perhaps in some of us.
It's a little too sensitive. Okay.
We're in the sleep lab at the Minnesota Regional Sleep disorders center.
Mission control, we call it. Yeah.
We're viewing the typical sleep terror episode. This little girl who is, uh,
five years old waiting be aging these sleep terror episodes every single night.
That's Dr Carlos Shank, who we heard from before.
We're in Minnesota now at the Hennepin county sleep center here in a sleep lab
where he works. We're standing in front of him,
grainy black and white video of a little girl in her PJ's screaming time.
Aiden Dr.
Shank discovered an odd category of sleep disorders called Parasomnias,
which is why we came to talk to them.
Para means around Somnio means sleep around sleep.
This might be the human analog to the ducks.
People whose brains never quite shut off completely during sleep. Well,
this guy's interesting. He has seizures. No, no, no. He doesn't. Wait a second.
He showed us tape after tape. We're viewing a man.
We are very affectionately called Santa Claus on the screen.
Large guys thrashing back and forth. His legs are moving.
He's going back and forth for the sides of his back and then suddenly he starts
to
[inaudible].
Oh,
oh,
oh.
Is this real? Yeah. This guy is in and out of sleep.
He has no idea what he's doing.
One of the interesting things Dr Shank noticed when you first began to diagnose
parasomnias in the early eighties is that while they were in that kind of
liminal space around sleep,
a huge percentage of the patients would have these visceral dreams of being
attacked.
The common theme is a menace is posed from nowhere coming out of nowhere.
It's an immediate threat that you, you just can't ignore. Let's put it that way.
You have to either fight it or run away from it.
Your dreams can be very violent. This is Martin Sabelle,
h 88 he's another if Dr shanks patient,
I don't remember someone coming up the stairway.
In Martin's case, the attackers never had a face.
Sometimes it was a bear and I was going to fight William.
Hey [inaudible] here. That's Martin's wife, Gertrude Graham.
It was always trying to protect me. Yeah.
I would have black and blue bruises on my arms and hands because I was hitting
the headboard frequently.
The man is dreaming in bed with his wife that he is fighting to defend her.
If I'm an attacker,
when in fact he's beating the one night I was sleeping and all of a sudden he's
got his hands tightly around my straw. I am petrified.
Quit mark, you're dreaming. You're hurting me. Martin, you're dreaming.
Gertrude and Martin. Isabel are still married, believe it or not,
after 57 years though, she did force him to sell his guns.
He has never been happy about that. Well, they were quite valuable.
So you're suggesting then that all these people and the Iguanas and the ducks
and the dolphins all have a portion of their brain which is weary in the night.
That's what I'm hinting at. I don't want to go any stronger than hint at,
but there seems to be a something in us that's always watching out.
Always wary.
Bottom line here though is that sleep for all creatures is a dangerous thing in
a few unfortunate people are still awake to that fact. That's right.
Before we go to break.
I just want to thank Anne Habermann for her excellent reporting in Minnesota and
also before her Cara Oehler and to remind you to stay with us because we're
going to turn our attention shortly from danger to deprivation.
Radiolab. We'll continue in a moment.
This is Nicole from Brooklyn.
Radiolab is supported in part by the National Science Foundation and by the
Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
this
is Radiolab. You are rubber [inaudible]. It's my name and your jet Jetta.
I'm Rod. And today our topic on radio lab is sleep. Yup.
It is something that all of us do. We can't help but do it.
It's dangerous to do. It's so good and it's universal. I think about it.
You know,
sleep is dangerous and if sleep could have been circumvented in some way,
natural selection probably would have found a way to do it.
Let's Steve Lima again from Indiana State University. Yeah, it because it would,
it just, it'd be such a great idea to not sleep. Don't I know it,
but there are times when you just can't sleep. Right.
Maybe you're one of the 35 million Americans I am. Who has chronic insomnia.
Yeah. You just can't sleep. You don't know why it just doesn't happen.
Or maybe you do it to yourself and you pull all nighters for school or you have
to drive long distances or,
and here's what we want to turn our attention to next. Maybe it is done to you.
Hmm. That's the case with producer Hannah Palin.
She kept this audio diary of her own experiment with sleep deprivation.
She has an 18 month old son,
two 54 for the record.
[inaudible]
today's my first day back at work,
we were discussing budgets. I just,
I just,
I couldn't even articulate what it was that I was seeing on the computer screen
and try to communicate that to the curator that I worked for.
The words didn't come, my dad, my dad on me.
Instead of saying, well, Nicolette,
I believe that that choice was made because no, no. All that came out was like,
um, honey buckets. I mean, nothing,
nothing would come out. There's just no brain cells.
Really Brown was my sleeve. So anyway,
that was my first day back at work.
[inaudible]
Dominick, well not sleep. Don't know.
I'm trying to get him to sleep and kind of met my Watson.
This just sucks. It totally sucks.
Here's the funny thing, everybody has a theory,
and I was talking to my sister-in-law tonight and her theory is that he's not
getting enough milk because milk has some
agent in it that would help him sleep and he doesn't like milk. It's true.
Other people say, Oh, if he just would exercise him,
if he just gets fresh air and exercise, he'll sleep all night. If he
just let him cry,
he would sleep all night if you just would do whatever it is we're not doing,
he would sleep all night.
Okay.
And there's this feeling like, okay,
there's a feeling like I am doing it all wrong and that I'm a failure as a
parent and I don't know how to do this.
Come here sweetie.
So anyway,
I needed to record just one thing really quickly and that is that yesterday and
today I've been struck by,
I'm in struck by these waves of
satisfaction and delight with being alive in this amazing landscape with
the funny kid, mountains and,
and water and I don't know,
maybe it's just getting a little more sleep in the last couple of days when I
suddenly feel like, wow, I'm so lucky.
Okay, I've got to take my kid to play now. Here we go.
Do you know the Muffin man? The muffin man.
Okay. That whole, I'm loving life. Yeah,
that's all gone now.
It's pretty much because Dominic won't take a nap.
We came home from the beach,
which I thought would wear him out and we sat down and read some stories,
which for some reason,
and I realized that an element to the sleep deprivation and an element to this
whole thing is that I get angry from having my own needs subverted to the needs
of this little tiny person,
which when you're not sleep deprived is not a big deal.
Oh, tired. I tired cry.
I don't want to wish a minute of Dominic's childhood away because it's so
precious to me.
I was looking forward to, uh,
that moment when, um, we be able to say, honey,
I have to go to sleep and he does it
die? Harrington? No, not dying
soon. Huh?
Who Does Your Eyes Buck? Hi.
Here's my personal take on what it's like to be sleepy. Okay.
And to crave sleep as much as
you crave water or breath.
I crave it.
Thanks to Hannah Balin and her son Dominic and her husband Steve. Oh,
I know. Poor Hannah. But there is a science question looking in the background,
which is when you know, when Hannah was so tired,
why does she feel that way? You know what? W what?
Because she's, she hasn't been sleeping well. Yeah, but, but what makes her,
you know, what is the essence of tiredness? Lack of sleep. Hello?
Chemically, I'm asking you chemically what is happening to her.
If you were way down in herself, could you see something tired like going on?
That's what I, that's a good question actually.
I'm glad you think so because I know a guy who has a theory about this.
Did you see Tiger yesterday? Now? Tiger [inaudible].
He'd the best round of antibody. I mean the guy who's on the believable.
This is doctor gallon pack and in addition to being a rabid golf fan,
he's also a rabid, but can you be a rabid biologist? Sure.
At the University of Pennsylvania,
he's been looking at sleep down at the cellular level and one thing that he's
found over and over and over, and that's been shown in Moses has been shown in,
has been shown in fruit fly,
is that inside certain cells in all those different animals,
when they're sleep deprived,
essentially what happens is you don't get proteins properly for,
excuse me,
proteins properly folded a phenomenon called the unfolded protein response.
What on Earth does that mean? Is that a good thing or a bad thing?
You're asking? Why do you need proteins to properly fold? Yeah,
I guess that's what I'm asking. Well, your made of proteins.
Proteins are the essence of you. So if your proteins are misshapen,
if they're not folded properly, don't fold the proteins properly.
They don't have the right three dimensional structure. And as a result,
they start accumulating inside the south and then these different unfolded
proteins can aggregate together in front of [inaudible]
clumps
inside the cell and essentially clog it up.
And it's really quite toxic to cells. Clumpiness equals tiredness.
It would be his formula. Remember when Hannah was so exhausted? Yeah.
God, this just sucks. Well,
because she hasn't slept much really sad inside herself.
Lots of these valuable little proteins have not folded properly that he thinks
is the consequence of not having enough sleep.
So maybe what's going on is the cells can't do their business quite as well and
things start to break down and that adds up across the whole of your body to a
few fueling. But when she gets to sleep,
remember when she's so happy? Yeah. Suddenly feel like, wow,
because of the sleep, I am so lucky.
A group of cleaner reppers have gone through herself,
removed the toxic and misshapen proteins so that it affects sleep as the best
housemaid you've ever had in the hotel. Have you [inaudible]
and this idea, the,
the idea of sleep as a cleaner upper might even explain one of the most basic
things about us as humans,
how we learn.
That's the notion of doctor Giulio Tononi testing, testing, testing.
My producer Ellen Horn and I went to visit him at his offices in Madison,
Wisconsin. What are we expecting? What does he look like?
We don't know what he was like a football play,
but like a quarter backer. Titans. Not like a little like a going back here.
So big, but not overwhelming. Yes. Yeah. How do you even know that?
Yeah. Website C
I was totally wrong. Now to be fair,
he is a very attractive guy who has sandy blonde hair and glasses.
So you actually, the more the sensitive guy intellectual than a linebacker.
Yeah. Introduce yourself. Um, Giulio Tononi.
I am a professional psychiatry here at University of Wisconsin Madison.
But when it comes to the subject of sleep, which is his specialty,
he takes sleep very seriously. Like what got you is in sleep.
Just sleep is the annihilation of consciousness.
So it's a terrible time in which everything disappears.
The universe and yourself with it.
I think if people didn't sleep and didn't have the unconscious leap,
they possibly wouldn't even realize that continence is an enormous gift.
So being awake then is wonderful, but it's what happens when you're asleep.
He says that's what allows you to make very important connections in your life.
And he noticed this first when he was connecting with the,
I believe it was a guitar, just playing music. I used to play, for instance,
I played classical guitar.
I'm sure many people who play musical instruments know that you may train and
train and train on a piece during the day and you get better for sure,
but you're never perfect. Oh,
and then you sleep over it the next day you wake up, you play it again,
and now it's smooth and you know it flows beautiful.
That happened to you? It happened to me. It happens to lots of people
that happened to me all the time.
I discovered that sometimes if I worked on a piece and put it away and went to
bed and cut some rust,
I had it better learned than if I stayed up all night cramming.
Yeah, definitely.
There's one story and I hadn't thought about this for a long time, but,
well first of all Robin, I like play in a band together.
The band is called the sisterhood of convoluted thinkers and we switch
instruments like a lot. She's usually the bass player.
I was going to play drums and I had to learn how to play drums,
so we rented a cabin,
we went somewhere to rehearse and at night she was really just kind of
practicing and practicing and trying to get this written one particular be like,
I worked on it like a lot.
I just keep going and going and playing that one thing again and again and
again.
And I finally just gave up and went to sleep and the next morning I got up and
went like straight to the kid and I just played it like immediately.
The bucket, the stool, she was [inaudible] book.
You could just do it.
I thought it was magic or you could just learn stuff in your sleep.
So wait,
they were showing the middle of the night somehow the things that your fingers
did repeatedly and the notes that you were using to propel your fingers.
All those things somehow got into, got more,
got better learned. So you learned overnight or you,
I mean what does have to do with it or you remember better in the morning? No.
What happens is that the next day you're a bit better off what happens during
the night to make you better off. This is up for contention.
[inaudible] contention is that sleep helps you remember by forgetting a,
and I don't know what that means. Let me explain to you what he's,
what he's saying. He says there's a limited amount of space in your brain.
The real estate in the brain speed, limited,
limited amount and make sense as a small little guy up there. Yep.
And yet every experience you have during the day is going to take away some
spaces up a little of what you got when you are awake.
Inevitably you learn whether you want it or not.
You are going around and talking to me. Just having breakfast,
have a medium coffee, going to work.
Then you get on the phone with the you, with your friends, talking to your mom.
Very different from to the friends. Then going home,
taking a bath. I picked the bath. Yeah, I get it. Again,
everything you do during the day, every thought you think, no matter how small,
it all causes your brain to form new connections.
This conversation as we're having it is reshaping my brain. Yeah.
A little pathways are forming that weren't there before I sat down.
Whether we recognize it or not. Lots of things.
I go to change your brain by the end of the Waking Day.
So if in the middle of the afternoon you sit down with your guitar and you
practice the guitar intently, those two hours,
you're also making connections and because you're concentrating,
maybe you're making more connections than you usually use or guitar connections
and all those synaptic connections made during the day. Wow.
I'll just have a meeting. Yeah,
on the other other,
by the time you really, for sleep
up in your head. Hello,
Miss [inaudible]
and that is where we think sleep kicks in. Well, I'm going to guess here,
but I think you think that sleep is a garbage detail that comes into this. Okay.
You're done. You're done. You're done. It's actually even simpler than that.
According to Noni, there's not really a janitor who comes in and decides, okay,
you have to leave. You get to stay. Nothing like that. Instead he says,
what happens?
We think that during sleep waves of electrical activity,
kind of like a late evening bath wash over your head,
they start at the back of your head.
Let me move to the front. These waves are called slow or summation,
and over the course of the night, 1000 times at night,
those waves wash through all the experiences of your day,
all the little synaptic connections that you made all day long and every one of
those connections, all of that gets just a little bit softer.
They get weaker progressively, gracefully. They get me even.
He says the things you want to hold onto like the guitar. Wait a second.
Wait a second.
You were the one who said you learned how to play the instrument in the
afternoon. You went to sleep and you play the instrument better in the morning.
Yeah. Why would you wake up the next morning playing better?
You should play more weekly with less confidence and less memory because after
all, you've just given the whole place a bath. It's all relative, sir.
What he means by relative is this,
that that mess of new connections in your head. Yeah.
Some of those connections are softer. Some of those connections were louder.
The random things you ordered for lunch, they're softer. Okay. But the guitar,
because you spent so much time thinking about guitar technique,
you spend so much energy on it. That's louder.
So we just measuring connections here.
Now imagine that sleep is a big volume knob.
So listening to what happens when you lower the volume on the whole day
and lower. Yeah.
You hear how the softer stuff just falls away. You can't hear it anymore. Yeah,
bad. The Guitar, while it's getting softer too,
because it was so loud to begin with, now it stands out a bit more clearly now.
Yeah. The signal is sent up to the half survive reasonably well,
are heard better because the background has become more silent.
So your ability to play the guitar better the next morning is not because you've
learned these skills overnight that you didn't have before is because all the
other stuff taken up.
Your brain has gone down in volume and you're left with relatively speaking,
a better guitar
fingering technique. You put your finger on it.
So Mr Schenone feels that sleep is a little bit like we didn't like the process
of erosion at the end of the day or rather at the beginning of the morning,
the things left standing are the things you need to know.
We should, uh, we should go to break. Okay.
So coming up next for those of us who can get the sleep next I change to dream.
This is radio lab. I'm Jad Abumrad and I,
a rapid growth will continue in a moment.
This is Cheryl Ang calling from San Francisco.
Radiolab is supported in part by the National Science Foundation and by the
Alfred p Sloan Foundation enhancing public understanding of science and
technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
this is Radiolab. I'm Jad and I'm Robert.
Today's program is about sleep as in the kind of sleep where you pretend to
dream. Exactly. You. Do you know that story about the um, the benzine molecule?
No. Speaking of dreams. Hmm. Well,
here in Kenzin 1865 German chemist is trying to figure out the shape of this
molecule. Benzine.
He knows that has a certain amount of one kind of Adam and a certain amount of
another, but he can't figure out how they all link up. Right.
And he's tortured by this problem. Ghosts sleep. Yeah.
Has a dream of a snake biting it's tail, wakes up,
bolts right up and says it's a rain. It's a will.
Do you believe that? I want to. Well, yeah. I mean, don't get me wrong.
I hate it when people tell me that dreams hate it.
I want to stab my eye with a fork. And frankly, when people tell me that just,
I don't know why I'm never going to tell you about my dreams again. I'm good.
But you know you're not alone because for a long time scientists have or have
avoided studying dreams cause they,
they think they're so random and meaningless and unstuck. Vulnerable, right?
But we did meet a guy, I'm Bob Stick Gold, S. T. I. C. K. G. O. L. D.
I'm an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School who found an
interesting way to ask the question,
why do we dream? Simple question. Very hard answer.
Robert.
Stick gold was one of the first modern scientists to take dreams seriously and
for him it'd be actually began kind of by accident. I had,
Vermont is my family. We had gone and climbed camel's Hump,
one of the higher easy to climb mountains in Vermont.
We'd gone at eight in the morning. We were back at two in the afternoon
and for that whole day he'd been up climbing on the rocks,
gripping them with his hands, really climbing. Later that night, I lie down,
I close my eyes
[inaudible]
I can feel the rocks under my hands
and I started startle up and I said, well, that's really bizarre.
It wasn't like I was thinking about it. I was there. I could feel the rock.
I've been off the mountain for eight hours, nothing like that had happened.
I lie down in bed for three minutes, starting to go to sleep and boom,
it's there and I tried again and I fell asleep. Two hours later I wake up,
I have to go to the bathroom and go to the bathroom. I come back and I say,
that was way cool. I have to try that again
and I can not get it back.
What happened in those two hours to those memories that they won't intrude
anymore. And then I started talking to friends and they say, oh,
trike try canoeing or someone else says try, Huh?
Try Whitewater rafting if you want to get that and someone else's, oh hello,
take organic chemistry and you go to bed at night and all you see are these
bloody molecules rotating in front of your eyes. Those daytime
are affecting your dreams. And that got him thinking,
what exactly is the connection between what you do doing today and what you
dream at night? What are the rules of that? He figured, all right,
well this replay is kind of interesting. Maybe I'll test it,
but how if I get some subjects together,
what could I have them do during the day that would reliably end up in their
dreams?
But you can't have them all go for a hike and I'm probably not going to get
permission to take them Whitewater rafting. Too expensive. So what could he do?
Sort of set fallow for a year.
And I was moaning because some of my students about how I can't think of how to
do this, and someone says
Tetris, somebody else says, absolutely
[inaudible]
and I'm saying, what? What? They said, well, don't you play Tetris? And I say,
yes, but when you start playing Tetris,
sure.
Is that when you start playing touches
[inaudible]
go to bed at night,
you lie down in bed and you see tetris pieces falling down in front of your
eyes. Sure, absolutely. Your eyeballs, you guys both know that?
Oh yeah.
I got a cover of Science magazine for the first published paper and dreaming in
40 years because I discovered that and everybody already knew it.
[inaudible]
it was that simple. He got a bunch of people, put them in a room,
had him play tetris.
Later that night they woke up and 60% of them were dreaming of Tetris.
60% do you know that? I mean, just from their reports.
As they're falling asleep,
we're monitoring them electric physiologically and as they start to drift off to
sleep. These report. Now
we have filming today.
This tetris observation was a pretty good start in terms of getting at that
question, why do we dream? Why we dream? How does it work?
What if as a next step, instead of having the people report their own dreams,
waking them up and doing that whole thing, what if instead you could cut the
person out of the equation entirely and go right to the source,
to the dream directly certain that Wilson A,
I'm a researcher here at MIT and I'm a neuroscientist studying,
learning and memory. That's what Matt Wilson
does. It takes us to the dream lab. When we first come in,
what we see is this bank of monitors, 13 monitors all in a row,
each monitor displaying ongoing activity in the brain, little panels,
each panel, uh, showing the [inaudible].
It's like the Kennedy Space Center.
Really all the monitors have data just flashing all over them.
Graphs and squiggly lines and numbers.
It's not immediately clear where all this information is coming from,
but if you peek around the back,
you'll see that all the computer wires go to one box,
which then connects to a cable,
which then goes up to the ceiling over to a wall and down into the head to the
head
generated of one sitting tiny red areas. Yes.
It was just kind of hanging out in his own little basket. So even just resting,
is that the little guy himself? Yeah,
he looks pretty normal except for this cable coming out of his skull and the
cable is basically a microphone or a bunch of them,
which Matt uses to ease drop on the brain cells inside the rat's head.
As they chitchat and this is what that sounds like.
Okay.
You can hear this kind of snap crackle, pop sound.
These are individual cells that are firing like a [inaudible].
Sure.
There one of those kind of whooshing sound,
I can tell this animal is sitting resting quietly.
Amazingly. He says as well, he has his back to the animal.
He is so fluent with the Morris Code language of the rat's brain sales.
He doesn't even have to actually look at the animal to know what it's doing.
You can just instantly decode all of that snapping,
kind of like that guy in the matrix. The ball guy, I don't even see the code.
All I see is bond Brunette redhead just by listening.
Matt knows when the animal is sitting, he knows when it is sleeping.
He knows when it's running around and amaze even can tell which direction it's
running. Just happened
that as we were studying these patterns, while the animal ran around,
after the experiments, the animals would, they would get tired.
They would go to sleep. I would be firing there in the room,
but I would continue to listen to the activity.
You notice how it's gotten silent? Yeah.
I began to notice that the animals were asleep.
The brain cells weren't just firing randomly in animals.
We're going to rem sleep.
Okay,
now he is in bed going into rem right now. The pattern of activity here,
notice that it's not,
these rushes anymore sounded very much like the pattern that the animal had just
been running through. In fact, if you weren't watching the animal,
you would think, oh, animals gotten up and it's running around again.
But then you turn and you look and you see the animal is asleep.
He checked the data and it wasn't simply that the rat was running around in its
mind while its body was asleep. It seemed to be running a specific route.
The same route in fact that it had run earlier in the day. Same sequence,
same order, same everything. Yes, it was rerunning it's maze,
step for step. So then he asked the next question,
are they seeing the things that they saw while they were awake?
We can actually look into these questions as a rat fan. So the answers,
the answers,
we see evidence of replay and basically all of the parts of the brain that we
have looked in,
they see the maze that they ran through the very same maze. Yes,
that is streaming in a sense they are, how do we define dreaming?
So sounds like dreaming to me, but the question remains,
why would the rat or any creature do this?
And so Matt came up with a simple next experiment.
He decided to give the rat to mazes.
What would that do to extremes at the night or whatever you want to call them
if they run on maze number one and then on as number two we see them running
maze one in maze two together in a way that they did not experience when they
were awake.
Oh, so it's like a remix new pattern that includes part of maize one and part of
phase two. It turns out that when the Rad had more than one maze and its memory,
it began to invent completely new mazes,
gives us the thought that sleep is this unique opportunity to basically run
through events,
to put them together in ways that may not have occurred
while the animals were awake and that's what learning really is.
Learning is about synthesis,
about taking things that were apparently unrelated and figuring out the
connection as figuring out the rules, the hidden rules,
the undiscovered rules that will allow us to create something new.
I think dreaming is a time when we try out possibilities that in waking we might
not feel were worth trying and when it really works, it's,
it can be profoundly important. If Robert's dead gold is right,
then how does this solving the problem thing? How does it work?
How does the brain decide what to put
into a dream and what to leave out of a dream?
One of the interesting things about dreams is that people don't have dreams
where their word processing, where they're surfing the net,
these things that they spent huge amounts of their day doing don't get into
their dreams, but somehow tetris gets in there every time we die.
And why would that be? Well, he has a hunch,
which he's actually exploring with it completely different video games.
We've moved to a game called Alpine racer, which we bought out of a arcade.
She showed us, took us down the hall to uh, to the game room. Here we are,
and there in the corner it stood mockingly oh wow.
It's a full body game. Please step up. I step up to the right.
It's trying to lock itself.
It's still warming up and then I set off down a virtual mountain.
Alright, I'm going down the hill. I am also a girl.
I'm also avoiding the ski for what I'm doing. Take a nice little turn there.
Be careful of the little wall straight down the head and down we go. Oh No, no,
the tree [inaudible] we're not going to go through the tunnel.
This is a [inaudible]. Oh, that hurt. As you can hear,
this game was really stressful, I would say, which is by design.
Robert stickle has the theory that as you go through your day,
your brain is constantly keeping track of emotion. That's the thing.
Emotional content, like when you run into a virtual tree for example,
your brain is going to flag that stuff. It's going to flag that as important.
It says, Ooh, I need to remember this so I can work on it later.
I'm going to put a sticky on this one.
So if it puts a sticky on everything that's hard during the day,
then all the brain has to do when it's creating a dream is go and grab it.
Sticky. Aw, I did. I died but I died. Nice.
Just for record, you've got further
than jet on your first try. Oh Wow. Wow. It's like,
eh. That's okay. Could you say that again?
So you have people play at Alpine racer for 45 minute bursts throughout the day.
What happens next?
You wake them up to monitor their brain activity and just as they're falling
asleep within the first two minutes after they fall asleep,
we'll wake them up.
There's some microphone right next to them in their bed and they just report
what was going through their minds.
I was just thinking about scanning and we get on the first night up to 40% of
all the reports being about skiing, the game that I've been playing.
Okay. Ski Racer, again, 40% almost half of them,
and that's right up there.
What I would expect to see after trauma where something has been labeled so
intensely that the brain says, okay, it's obvious
what's on the agenda for tonight. Stickle things.
He's seeing the outline of the dream making process here.
It starts really simply the very beginning of sleep,
like right after you fall asleep with the replay.
This he suspects as just the brain emptying out at sticky things that really
intrigued me during the day that they felt during the day. Yeah,
but what happens if we let the people go to sleep?
Sleep two hours like I did that very first time after climbing the mountain,
wakes them up after two hours of sleep because remember he couldn't get back the
memory of the rocks after he'd spent two hours of sleep. That's right,
and what he's found is that if you fast forward two hours into the dream,
get almost no reports of skiing at all,
the replay seems to dissolve into a remix.
You start getting reports like,
oh, I jumped. I was sliding down a hill going down hill,
just rolling down a hill.
I was about to say it downhill. Banana.
I was thinking about skateboarding.
I was thinking about about a bunch of bananas. He slope.
Someone else
had a dream that they were rushing through a forest with their body,
incredibly stiff and their legs not moving at all.
As if they were on a conveyor belt. It's like as the dream goes on,
the brain is starting to free associate.
What do I have in my past that has anything to do with mountains,
anything to do with crashing or skiing, anything at all that can help me.
What do I have in all my memories,
my case from the last 60 years that fits associatively thematically and the
result, well might seem random. It is, but every so often he says,
you come up with the right answer.
So now we get to your dreams of people discovering the structure of benzene.
Cuco was his name. [inaudible] excellent August calculus.
He was a German guy I talked about earlier who had a dream of a snake eating its
tail and realized from that dream that the shape
of the benzene molecule is a ring. I don't know if that dream is true,
but maybe that is in fact the point of dreaming.
It's this time when you shut off the outside, turn inside,
take the problems that you've got and start to really work on them,
pull them apart,
make connections that you wouldn't normally make during the day.
Oh, however,
have you ever wondered why would it be necessary when solving problems like this
to dream so vividly?
Are you at all puzzled by the super duper technicolor,
extraordinarily cinematic quality of some of these things?
Because if it were just an every day brain function to sort of make sense of the
world and allow you to make new connections,
you really wouldn't need quite the the movie quality.
So when we talk about dreams,
what seems to come into dreams are memories, concepts, relationships,
associations that have a strong emotional flavor and I'm guessing from the data
need a full blown orchestration to be properly processed.
And it is, it's technical or the colors are are overwhelming almost.
So if I hear you right, what you're saying in Robert's question about why is it
dreams? So a vivid is that, I don't know,
but maybe the vividness
helps that whole long answers. What a Harvard professor says. Instead of saying,
I don't know.
I guess we should wrap up.
If you want any more information on anything that you heard at this hour,
visit our website,
radiolab.org you see there'll be more information about sleep on there at will
there? Yes,
there will be more information on sleep and you can sign up for our podcast
radio lab.org also, while you're at a,
send us an email radio lab@wnyc.org is the address.
Remember also the sleep spelled backwards is pills,
which what you do to an orange grapefruit and two pair of Jad. I haven't run,
I'm Robert College. We'll see you later.